---
title: The BinaryPack1pre2 JSON-like representation format
abbrev: binarypack1pre2
docname: draft-bormann-apparea-bpack-01
date: 2013-02-25

coding: UTF-8
stand_alone: yes

ipr: trust200902
area: Applications
wg: APP area
kw: Internet-Draft
cat: info

pi:
  toc: yes
  sortrefs: yes
  symrefs: yes

author:
      -
        ins: C. Bormann
        name: Carsten Bormann
        org: Universität Bremen TZI
        street: Postfach 330440
        city: Bremen
        code: D-28359
        country: Germany
        phone: +49-421-218-63921
        email: cabo@tzi.org

informative:
  msgpack:
    target: http://wiki.msgpack.org/display/MSGPACK/Format+specification
    title: MessagePack format specification
    author:
      -
        ins: K. Ohta
        name: Kazuki Ohta
        org:
      -
        ins: S. Colebourne
        name: Stephen Colebourne
    date: 2011
  binarypack:
    target: https://github.com/binaryjs/js-binarypack
    title: BinaryPack for Javascript browsers
    author:
      -
        ins: E. Zhang
        name: Eric Zhang
        org:
    date: 2012
  msgpack-js:
    target: https://github.com/creationix/msgpack-js
    title: msgpack for node
    author:
      -
        ins: T. Caswell
        name: Tim Caswell
        org:
    date: 2012
  msgpack-js-browser:
    target: https://github.com/creationix/msgpack-js-browser
    title: msgpack for the browser
    author:
      -
        ins: T. Caswell
        name: Tim Caswell
        org:
    date: 2012
  N4246R2:
    target: ftp://std.dkuug.dk/JTC1/sc2/wg2/docs/n4246.pdf
    title: Stabilizing CJK Compatibility Ideographs through the use of Standardized Variants
    author:
      -
        ins: K. Lunde
        name: Ken Lunde
        org: Adobe Systems Incorporated
    date: 2012-03-05
    seriesinfo:
      "ISO/IEC": JTC1/SC2/WG2 N4246R2
  msgpack-update:
    target: https://gist.github.com/frsyuki/5022569
    title: msgpack-update-proposal1.md
    author:
      -
        ins: S. Furuhashi
        name: Sadayuki Furuhashi
    date: 2012-02-24

--- abstract

JSON (RFC 4627) is an extremely successful format for the
representation of structured information, supporting Boolean values,
numbers, strings, arrays, and tables.
Recently, a number of applications have started to look for binary
representation formats that solve a similar problem.
In particular, constrained node networks can benefit from such a
binary representation format.

A very successful binary representation that is otherwise comparable
to JSON is MessagePack.
Recently, a number of implementations have modified or extended MessagePack
such that it allows for distinguishing UTF-8 strings from binary data.
Further discussion on the MessagePack repository has resulted in
proposals how to integrate such an addition back into the MessagePack
community.

This draft, as an independent effort, documents one such format,
tentatively calling it BinaryPack1pre2 while the MessagePack extension
proposals make their way through the MessagePack community.

The current version -01 of this document is a snapshot that
demonstrates a general direction.  The details may change in future
versions based on the development of the MessagePack specification.

--- middle

Introduction        {#problems}
============

(To be written -- for now please see the Abstract.)

A description of the MessagePack binary representation format can be
found in {{msgpack}}.  A recent proposal for an update, still under discussion, is
in {{msgpack-update}}.

One of the early proposals implementing separate types for byte
strings and UTF-8 strings was called BinaryPack.
An implementation of BinaryPack is available in {{binarypack}}.
(An extension similar in spirit, but different in details, was made
for the {{msgpack-js}} and {{msgpack-js-browser}} projects.)

Objectives
----------

(TBD, but this is a rough first approach:)

The objectives of the present specification, roughly in decreasing
order of importance, are:

* Representing a reasonable set of basic data types and structures
  using binary encoding.  "Reasonable" here is largely influenced by
  the capabilities of JSON, with the single addition of adding raw
  byte strings.  The structures supported are limited to trees; no
  loops or lattice-style graphs.

* Being implementable in a very small amount of code, thus being
  applicable to constrained nodes {{?I-D.ietf-lwig-terminology}}, even
  of class 1.  (Complexity goal.)  As a corollary: Being close to
  contemporary machine representations of data (e.g., not requiring
  binary-to-decimal conversion).

* Being applicable to schema-less use.  For schema-informed binary
  encoding, a number of approaches are already available in the IETF,
  including XDR {{?RFC4506}}.  (However, schema-informed use of the
  present specification, such as for a marshaling scheme for an RPC
  IDL, is not at all excluded.  Any IDL for this is out of scope for
  this specification.)

* Being reasonably compact.  "Reasonable" here is bounded by JSON as
  an upper bound in size, and by implementation complexity maintaining
  a lower bound.  The use of general compression schemes violates both
  of the complexity goals.

* Being reasonably frugal in CPU usage.  (The other complexity goal.)
  This is relevant both for constrained nodes and for potential usage
  in high-volume applications.

* Supporting a reasonable level of round-tripping with JSON, as long
  as the data represented are within the capabilities of JSON.
  Defining a unidirectional mapping towards JSON for all types of
  data.

Terminology
-----------

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in {{!RFC2119}}.

The term "byte" is used in its now customary sense as a synonym for "octet".

All multi-byte integers in this protocol are interpreted in network
byte order.

Where arithmetic is used, this specification uses the notation
familiar from the programming language C, except that the operator
"**" stands for exponentiation.


Notation
--------

This specification uses a trivial notation for code bytes and the
bitfields in them the meaning of which should be mostly obvious.
More formally speaking, the meaning of the notation is:

Potential values for the code bytes themselves are expressed by
templates that represent 8-bit most-significant-bit-first binary
numbers (without any special prefix), where 0 stands for 0, 1 for 1,
and variable segments in these code byte templates are indicated by
sequences of the same letter such as kkkkkkk or ssss, the length of
which indicates the length of the variable segment in bits.

In the notation of values derived from the code bytes, 0b is used as a
prefix for expressing binary numbers in most-significant-bit first
notation (akin to the use of 0x for most-significant-digit-first
hexadecimal numbers in the C programming language).
Where the above-mentioned sequences of letters are then referenced in
such a binary number in the text, the intention is that the value from
these bitfields in the actual code byte be inserted.

Example:  The code byte template

> 101nssss

stands for a byte that starts (most-significant-bit-first) with the
bits 1, 0, and 1, and continues with five variable bits, the first of which is
referenced as "n" and the next four are referenced as "ssss".
Based on this code byte template, a reference to

> 0b0ssss000

means a binary number composed from a zero bit, the four bits that are in the
"ssss" field (for 101nssss, the four least significant bits) in the actual
byte encountered, kept in the same order, and three more zero bits.

Also, 0xhh stands for the hexadecimal value hh, and 1B, 2B, 4B, 8B, nB
stand for 1, 2, 4, 8, or n bytes of data following; (1B) etc. stand
for the numerical value of these bytes as an integer interpreted in network byte
order; nD stands for n data objects, each in turn in BinaryPack1pre2 representation format.

The BinaryPack1pre2 Representation Format
====================================

Data Types
----------

The BinaryPack1pre2 representation format is able to represent the
following data types:

* Integers (represented in signed and unsigned forms)
* Floating point values (in IEEE 754 32-bit and 64-bit forms)
* special values nil, false, true
* opaque ("raw") byte strings, or "binary strings"
* UTF-8 strings
* arrays, which can contain any combination of data types
* tables (often called maps, hashes, dictionaries; objects in JSON),
  which contain   pairs, key and value, which may in turn be of any
  data type

This list is mostly faithful to JSON {{RFC4627}}, which however does
not distinguish integer from floating point number types.  Based on
recent discussions on the use of binary representation formats, the
present specification distinguishes UTF-8 strings from opaque binary strings.
(Interestingly, such a separation was already done in the binaryjs implementation
of a "95 % MessagePack" format {{binarypack}}, so the author of the present
specification started out by just lazily copying that; more recent input
taken from the msgpack developers {{msgpack-update}} is the technical
basis for the current proposal.)

Integers
--------

BinaryPack1pre2 provides a number of representations for integer values,
assuming that these occur often.  The encoder is free to choose any of
these representations that is able to represent the desired value.

| Bits     | Value        | Description                |
| 0nnnnnnn | 0bnnnnnnn    | Positive Integer (0..127)  |
| 111nnnnn | 0bnnnnn - 32 | Negative Integer (-32..-1) |
| 0xcc 1B  | 1B as uint   | Unsigned Integer           |
| 0xcd 2B  | 2B as uint   | Unsigned Integer           |
| 0xce 4B  | 4B as uint   | Unsigned Integer           |
| 0xcf 8B  | 8B as uint   | Unsigned Integer           |
| 0xd0 1B  | 1B as sint   | Signed Integer             |
| 0xd1 2B  | 2B as sint   | Signed Integer             |
| 0xd2 4B  | 4B as sint   | Signed Integer             |
| 0xd3 8B  | 8B as sint   | Signed Integer             |

Floating Point Values
---------------------

BinaryPack1pre2 provides 32-bit and 64-bit IEEE 754 values.
(See also {{half}}.)

| Bits    | Value                 | Description |
| 0xca 4B | 4B as 32-bit IEEE 754 | Float       |
| 0xcb 8B | 8B as 64-bit IEEE 754 | Double      |

Special Values
--------------

Similar to the special literals "false null true" in JSON,
BinaryPack1pre2 provides three special values:

| Bits | Value | Description   |
| 0xc0 | nil   | null, nothing |
| 0xc2 | false | Boolean false |
| 0xc3 | true  | Boolean true  |


Binary: Opaque Byte Strings
---------------------------

(Note that the specific codepoint allocations in this section are very
much up for discussion.  It can also be argued that we should be
spending some of the remaining reserved codepoints for short byte
strings.)

| Bits       | Value    | Description                      |
| 0xd5 1B nB | n = (1B) | byte string (0..(2**8-1) bytes)  |
| 0xd6 2B nB | n = (2B) | byte string (0..(2**16-1) bytes) |
| 0xd7 4B nB | n = (4B) | byte string (0..(2**32-1) bytes) |


UTF-8 Strings
-------------

| Bits        | Value       | Description                       |
| 101nnnnn nB | n = 0bnnnnn | Short UTF-8 string (0..31 bytes)  |
| 0xd9 1B nB  | n = (1B)    | UTF-8 string (0..(2**8-1) bytes)  |
| 0xda 2B nB  | n = (2B)    | UTF-8 string (0..(2**16-1) bytes) |
| 0xdb 4B nB  | n = (4B)    | UTF-8 string (0..(2**32-1) bytes) |

The strings transported MUST be UTF-8 strings {{!RFC3629}}.
(The general assumption is that these UTF-8 strings are in Network Unicode form
{{!RFC5198}}, see {{unicode}} for some more discussion.)

Arrays
------

| Bits        | Value      | Description                      |
| 1001nnnn nD | n = 0bnnnn | Short array (0..15 data elements)  |
| 0xdc 2B nD  | n = (2B)   | array (0..(2**16-1) data elements) |
| 0xdd 4B nD  | n = (4B)   | array (0..(2**32-1) data elements) |


Tables
------

| Bits        | Value          | Description                      |
| 1000nnnn nD | n = 2 * 0bnnnn | Short table (0..15 data pairs)  |
| 0xde 2B nD  | n = 2 * (2B)   | table (0..(2**16-1) data pairs) |
| 0xdf 4B nD  | n = 2 * (4B)   | table (0..(2**32-1) data pairs) |

The sequence of n elements is a sequence of pairs of data objects,
each pair represented as one data object representing the key followed
by the data object representing its associated value.

Discussion
==========

This draft tries to be faithful to the successful MessagePack {{msgpack}} format,
including an recent extension proposal that enables the distinction between opaque binary
byte strings and UTF-8 byte strings {{msgpack-update}}.

Little analysis has been made whether a slightly different bit
allocation (e.g., using up fewer of the code combination for
single-byte integers)
would be advantageous.  However, the gains from a different allocation
are likely to be limited except for pathological cases.
(The main benefit achievable may be to have more codepoints reserved
for future expansion.)

A short floating point (e.g., based on the 16-bit IEEE 754 floating
point value) might be a useful additional representation format.
Adding decimal floating point values probably is not so useful, except
where high fidelity to JSON is desired.

Some additional data types might be useful for some protocols,
e.g. UUIDs {{?RFC4122}}, date/time.  See also {{extensions}}.
This would further increase the distance from JSON that
BinaryPack1pre2 creates by distinguishing opaque and UTF-8 strings.

JSON roundtripping
------------------

BinaryPack1pre2 enables mostly lossless translation to JSON.  JSON
{{?RFC4627}}.  JSON roundtripping, however, is not necessarily the
primary design goal of BinaryPack1pre2, but it is a consideration.

In the translation of BinaryPack1pre2 to JSON, opaque byte strings SHOULD
be converted to equivalent base64url {{!RFC4648}} UTF-8 strings.
Without a schema, it is hard to do the inverse consistently, as
base64url encoded byte strings are not specially marked up in JSON.

When translating BinaryPack1pre2 floating point values to JSON, the usual
problem of converting binary fractions to decimal representation arises.
In the other direction, the choice of a floating point format may be
hard to do properly.  Clearly, any number that can be transformed from
a 64-bit IEEE 754 number to a 32-bit IEEE 754 number without loss of
information can be represented as the latter.  Without schema
information, it may be hard to find other cases where the precision
maybe is not that important.

IANA Considerations
===================

Once this has received some discussion, we will understand how exactly
to register Internet media types for this.

The potential extension mechanisms discussed in {{extensions}} may
need an IANA registry.

Security Considerations
=======================

(Nothing but generic warnings about correctly implementing protocol
encoders/decoders so far; this section will certainly grow as
additional security considerations become known.)

Acknowledgements
================

MessagePack was developed and promoted by Sadayuki Furuhashi ("frsyuki").

BinaryPack is a minor derivation of MessagePack that was developed by
Eric Zhang for the binaryjs project.  A similar, but different
extension was made by Tim Caswell for his {{msgpack-js}} and
{{msgpack-js-browser}} projects.

The author of the present specification deserves absolutely no credits
whatsoever for any of this.

--- back

Unicode Considerations {#unicode}
======================

(TBD.  Some initial guidelines at {{msgpack-update}}.
This section should make clear that:)

* At the BinaryPack1pre2 encoding/decoding layer, implementations are
  never concerned about Unicode normalization.

* Internet usage of Unicode is governed by {{!RFC5198}}.  The present
  specification will not try to second-guess the evolution of this
  standards-track document.

* {{RFC5198}} states that >>Before transmission, all character
  sequences SHOULD be normalized according to Unicode normalization
  form "NFC"<<.  There may be some need to interpret this "SHOULD" in
  the context of the present specification, as follows.

* There is a very strong expectation that applications making use of
  BinaryPack1pre2 will lean towards using Unicode in NFC form, as
  opposed to NFD.  In other words, receivers may expect data in the
  maximally composed form, as opposed to decomposed form.

* The Normalization component of NFC may create problems in some
  applications (e.g., see {{N4246R2}}).  Before this is
  repaired in some future version of Unicode, there is no expectation
  that all applications generating BinaryPack1pre2 always perform the
  canonical normalization where information loss would result.

* There is a strong expectation that BinaryPack1pre2 receivers be
  resilient to the small variations in Unicode usage discussed here.

Potential future work {#extensions}
=====================

Two data types have been discussed for addition to BinaryPack1pre2.

Reserved Code Points
--------------------

As of today, the following code points are reserved and could be used
for further extension, if required:

> 0xc1, 0xc4..0xc9, 0xd4, 0xd8

16-bit floating point {#half}
-----------------------------

16-bit floating points have become popular recently.
BinaryPack1pre2 could enable the efficient transport of small floating
point numbers by adding a Half-precision floating point representation:

| Bits    | Value                 | Description |
| 0xc9 2B | 2B as 16-bit IEEE 754 | Half        |
| 0xca 4B | 4B as 32-bit IEEE 754 | Float       |
| 0xcb 8B | 8B as 64-bit IEEE 754 | Double      |

DateTime
--------

Many applications need the transport of Date/Time information.
Some need micro- or nanosecond resolution, some are more concerned
about significant range.

In the IETF, both NTP timestamps {{!RFC5905}} and ISO8601 dates
{{?RFC3339}} are popular.  The former probably require short and long
versions to accommodate the different requirements in precision and
range.  As a start, a 32.32 and a 64.64 NTP timestamp could be
defined.  ISO8601 dates would need a length indicator and could
therefore look close to the string8 form in BinaryPack1pre2.
It is worth limiting the set of choices based on some more input on
what is actually required.

Prefixing extensions
--------------------

As the small number of remaining code points could be used up
quickly, some additions might preferably be expressed by a prefixing
scheme.  E.g., if 0xc1 is picked for prefixing, the format

> 0xc1 0xnn 0xd5 0x08 ...

could be used for designating an 8-byte binary string (0xd5 0x08 ...)
as e.g. a date/time in 32.32 NTP timestamp format; the same value for 0xnn
could also be followed by a 16-byte binary string for a full 64.64 NTP
timestamp and maybe even followed by an UTF-8 string for
GeneralizedTime *or* an ISO8601 time, depending on which of these
formats are desirable.
Implementations unaware of the semantics for a specific value of 0xnn
could still process the information as a binary or UTF-8 string.

The number of extensions defined this way should be kept very small,
not only to preserve coding efficiency by making do with the
single-byte discriminator.
The values for 0xnn would then be maintained in an IANA registry, with
a suitably careful allocation policy.  This needs further discussion.

Extension Points
----------------

More generally, evolution of a format always raises considerations about
compatibility.
There are two directions of compatibility:
- Old data/old senders to new receivers (forward compatibility) and
- new data/new senders to old receivers (backward compatibility).

Further extension of the msgpack format currently always loses
backward compatibility, as there is no way for an older implementation
to find out the length that is consumed by a construct that uses a new codepoint.
In addition to a prefixing mechanism, the BinaryPack1pre2 format could include
deliberate extension points that would at least allow an old receiver
to decode future versions of the BinaryPack1pre2 format without losing
synchronization in the byte stream, while possibly having to treat some of
the information as opaque.
